[draft] [blog] client registration options (#1027)
modelcontextprotocol/modelcontextprotocol: blog/content/posts/client_registration.md

+++
date = '2025-07-22T10:00:00Z'
draft = true
title = 'Evolving OAuth Client Registration in the Model Context Protocol'
author = 'Paul Carleton (Core Maintainer)'
tags = ['security', 'authorization', 'announcement]
+++

The Model Context Protocol (MCP) has adopted OAuth 2.1 as the basis for its authorization framework.  A key part of this flow is client registration.  In this post, I'll explore how we're looking to evolve client registration to address pain points for server implementers while providing better protections for users.

If you're familiar with OAuth and the current state of client registration in MCP, skip to "the options forward" section.

## Background on OAuth

A system implementing OAuth 2.1 should allow the user to grant a client access to a resource, and prevent attempts to trick the user into granting access to a client they didn't intend to (e.g. phishing).

The high level flow for OAuth is:
1. The client sends the user to an authorization server
2. The authorization server displays a consent screen to the user

> 3. If the user approves the clients access, the authorization server redirects the user back to the client with an access code

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. If the user approves the client's access, the authorization server redirects the user back to the client with an access code
```

4. The client exchanges the access code for an access token, which it saves
5. The client uses the access token in subsequent requests to access the resource

> As part of this flow, the server needs a few pieces of information about the client:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As part of this flow, the authorization server needs a few pieces of information about the client:
```

1. **Client name**: Human readable text to display in the consent screen to help the user decide whether they want to grant access.
2. **Redirect URL**: The destination to send the authorization code back to if the user consents.

> It's important that the server trust the information that it has about the client in order to prevent a malicious client from tricking a user into consenting access it didn't intend to.  For instance, if a malicious client could claim to be 'Claude Desktop' on the consent screen while actually being 'attacker.com', users might grant access thinking they're authorizing the legitimate Claude application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It's important that the authorization server trust the information that it has about the client in order to prevent a malicious client from tricking a user into consenting access it didn't intend to.  For instance, if a malicious client could claim to be 'Claude Desktop' on the consent screen while actually being 'attacker.com', users might grant access thinking they're authorizing the legitimate Claude application.
```

> (Note: we're specifically calling out redirect URLS)

Reviewer 2: A challenge with Client ID Metadata is preventing impersonation attacks. Any application can use the same metadata URL as their client_id - for example, both legitimate Claude Desktop and a malicious app could use https://claude.ai/client.json. Users would see identical branding during consent since both fetch the same metadata. The primary defence is client authentication using private keys, but this only works when the client and metadata domain are within the same trust boundary.

Reviewer 2: Chatting with @aaronpk, one potential solution to the cross-boundary authentication challenge is using platform attestation APIs. Native applications could leverage platform-specific attestation (iOS App Attest, macOS DeviceCheck, etc.) to prove their legitimacy to the client developer's backend service, which could then issue ephemeral JWTs for OAuth client authentication:

```mermaid
graph TB
    subgraph "User Device"
        ClaudeApp[Claude Desktop]
        Platform[Platform Attestation APIs<br/>iOS App Attest / macOS DeviceCheck]
    end
    
    subgraph "Anthropic Trust Boundary"
        AttestationBackend[Anthropic Attestation Backend]
        MetadataServer[claude.ai/client.json]
        PrivateKey[Anthropic Private Key]
    end
    
    subgraph "MCP Server Trust Boundary"
        MCPServer[MCP Authorization Server]
    end
    
    ClaudeApp -->|❶ Request attestation token| Platform
    Platform -->|❷ Attestation token| ClaudeApp
    ClaudeApp -->|❸ Send attestation + request JWT| AttestationBackend
    AttestationBackend -->|❹ Validate attestation| Platform
    AttestationBackend -->|❺ Generate ephemeral JWT| PrivateKey
    AttestationBackend -->|❻ Return signed JWT| ClaudeApp
    
    ClaudeApp -->|❼ OAuth request with client_id URL + JWT| MCPServer
    MCPServer -->|❽ Fetch metadata| MetadataServer
    MCPServer -->|❾ Validate JWT against JWKS| MetadataServer
    
    classDef userDevice fill:#ffcdd2,stroke:#e57373,stroke-width:2px
    classDef anthropic fill:#a8e6cf,stroke:#81c784,stroke-width:2px
    classDef mcpServer fill:#dcedc1,stroke:#aed581,stroke-width:2px
    classDef secure fill:#b8e6b8,stroke:#66bb6a,stroke-width:2px
    
    class ClaudeApp,Platform userDevice
    class AttestationBackend,MetadataServer,PrivateKey anthropic
    class MCPServer mcpServer
```

This shows how platform attestation bridges the trust boundary gap sincee Claude Desktop can authenticate to MCP servers without possessing Anthropic's private keys directly.

This would allow legitimate applications like Claude Desktop to authenticate while preventing malicious apps from impersonating them, since attackers couldn't pass the platform attestation checks. The client and metadata domain would still operate across trust boundaries, but establish a secure authentication channel through the platform's attestation infrastructure.

This approach requires additional infrastructure from client developers (e.g. Cursor, Claude, etc.) but would greatly expand the scenarios where Client ID Metadata works securely beyond same-organization deployments. Note, CLI tools would still have challenges for several existing clients (like Inspector, Claude Code, Codex, Gemini CLI) since they are currently typically installed via `npx`, `brew`, etc.

Author: updated the blog post to reframe the cimd vs. software statement / attestation

One option is for the user to go through the server's registration flow on behalf of the client. This requires the client to have a mechanism for the user to supply a client id and secret along with the server URL when connecting.

This works, but ends up putting a lot of work on the user, and either requires each additional user to go through the same amount of work, or invest in some other way of sharing a registered client ID safely among users (e.g within the same enterprise).

It does have the nice property that the user almost certainly trusts the client and redirect URL, otherwise they wouldn't go through so much effort to go through the registration flow with it.

### Dynamic Client Registration (DCR)

Another option that the MCP specification supports today is Dynamic Client Registration (DCR). In DCR, the Authorization Server provides a `/register` endpoint that the client can use to register "just in time" for the authorization flow.

> This takes work off the user, and off the client, but has other tradeoffs the server implementer to consider. A server implementation needs to:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This takes work off the user, and off the client, but has other tradeoffs the authorization server implementer to consider. An authorization server implementation needs to:
```

   User->>AuthServer: Authorization request<br/>(client_id=https://app.com/oauth.json)
   AuthServer->>MetadataURL: GET https://app.com/oauth.json
   MetadataURL-->>AuthServer: {name: "App", redirect_uris: [...]}
   AuthServer->>User: Show consent screen<br/>("App wants access...")
   User->>AuthServer: Approve
   AuthServer-->>Client: Authorization code
   Client->>AuthServer: Exchange code for token<br/>(client_id=https://app.com/oauth.json)
   AuthServer-->>Client: Access token
```

Checking against our goals:
* The servers can trust the client metadata by trusting the domain the metadata is hosted on
* Servers will have a single client ID per client (the metadata URL)
* Servers can allow or deny clients based on their metadata URL or metadata domain
* Servers don't need to handle any database by default, as they can fetch the metadata at authorization time.

The costs for this implementation are:
* Clients need to host a metadata document on an https URL
* Clients must provide the URL as their client ID (if they determine an authorization server supports this)
* Servers need to fetch the metadata, opening egress on their authorization request

> Client ID metadata can also be extended to require a JWKS and signed attestation at request time if desired.

Reviewer 2: This flow assumes the client can authenticate to the authorization server, typically using keys referenced in the metadata. For cross-domain scenarios (like desktop apps connecting to third-party servers), clients often cannot securely possess the metadata domain's private keys, creating a fundamental constraint on when this pattern works securely. Probably worth calling out.

| Approach | Client Developer Effort | User Effort | Server Trust in Metadata | Single Client ID per App | Selective Allow/Deny | Database Management |
|----------|------------------------|-------------|-------------------------|-------------------------|---------------------|-------------------|
| **Pre-registration (by developer)** | ❌ Must coordinate with each server | ✅ None - just connects | ✅ Full trust via manual verification | ✅ Yes | ✅ Full control | ✅ Simple, bounded |
| **Pre-registration (by user)** | ✅ None | ❌ Must register & manage credentials | ✅ User explicitly registers | ❌ Each user gets own ID | ✅ Full control | ⚠️ Grows with users |
| **Basic DCR** | ✅ None | ✅ None | ❌ Must trust self-asserted data | ❌ New ID per user/session | ⚠️ Limited (blocklists) | ❌ Unbounded growth or complex expiry |
| **DCR + Software Statements** | ⚠️ Must host JWKS & sign statements | ✅ None | ✅ Trust via domain/signature | ✅ Possible (via key identity) | ✅ Via trusted domains | ⚠️ Better but still needs storage |
| **Client ID Metadata** | ⚠️ Must host metadata document | ✅ None | ✅ Trust via domain | ✅ Yes (URL is ID) | ✅ Via domains | ✅ No storage needed* |

> \* Servers may choose to cache for performance but aren't required to maintain a registration database

Reviewer 2: While no registration database is _required_, trust conscious implementations will need metadata caching, fingerprinting for change detection, and policy enforcement. When metadata changes (client name, logo, redirect URIs, etc.), servers must decide whether existing user consents remain valid, since users made decisions based on different information.

   User->>AuthServer: Navigate to auth URL
   AuthServer->>User: 2. Display consent screen
   User->>AuthServer: Approve access
   AuthServer->>Client: 3. Redirect with authorization code
   Client->>AuthServer: 4. Exchange code for access token
   AuthServer-->>Client: Access token (saved)
   Client->>Resource: 5. Request with access token
   Resource-->>Client: Protected resource
```

The high level flow for OAuth is:

1. The client sends the user to an authorization server
2. The authorization server displays a consent screen to the user
3. If the user approves the client's access, the authorization server redirects the user back to the client with an access code
4. The client exchanges the access code for an access token, which it saves
5. The client uses the access token in subsequent requests to access the resource

As part of this flow, the server needs a few pieces of information about the client:

1. **Client name**: Human readable text to display in the consent screen to help the user decide whether they want to grant access.
2. **Redirect URL**: The destination to send the authorization code back to if the user consents.

> 
> In order to prevent a malicious client from tricking a user into granting access they didn't intend to grant, the authorization server must be able to trust the client information it has. For instance, if a malicious client could claim to be 'Claude Desktop' on the consent screen while actually being 'attacker.com', users might grant access thinking they're authorizing the legitimate Claude application.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In order to prevent a malicious client from tricking a user into granting access they didn't intend to grant, the authorization server must be able to trust the client information it has.

For example, a malicious client could claim to be `Claude Desktop` on the consent screen while actually being owned by someone not affiliated with Claude Desktop developers. Seeing the client information on the consent screen, users might grant access thinking they're authorizing the legitimate Claude Desktop, not realizing that some malicious client now has access to their account.
```

> 
> ## What We Want from Client Registration in MCP

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Improving Client Registration in MCP
```

> In MCP, a common pattern is for a user to paste an MCP server URL into a client, and connect to it. This cuts against the typical OAuth pattern because it is the user selecting the resource server to connect to rather than the client developer. While pre-registration works well when the client and server have a pre-existing relationship, it breaks down when they don’t.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For MCP users, a common pattern is to connect to an MCP server by using its URL directly in a MCP client.

This goes against the typical OAuth authorization pattern because the user is selecting the resource server to connect to rather than the client developer. This problem is compounded by the fact that there is an unbounded number of authorization servers that a MCP server may use, meaning that clients need to be able to complete the authorization flow regardless of the provider used.

Some client developers have implemented pre-registration with a select few authorization servers. In this scenario, the client doesn't need to rely on DCR when it detects an authorization server it knows. However, this is a solution that doesn't scale given the breadth of the MCP ecosystem - it's impossible to have every client be registered with every authorization server there is.
```

> 
> Let's lay out our goals for client registration, specifically for when a server and client don't have a pre-existing relationship:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To mitigate this challenge, we set out to outline some of the goals that we wanted to achieve with improving the client registration experience:
```

> 1. **Clients**: Client developers don't need to go through a pre-registration flow and distribute a client ID for each additional connected server.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. **Clients**: Client developers don't need to implement pre-registration and distribute a client ID for each authorization server MCP servers might be using.
```

> 2. **Users**: Users don't need to go through a pre-registration flow and paste in client id with the server URL

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
2. **Users**: Users don't need to go through a pre-registration process themselves and manually specify a client ID for every MCP server they connect to.
```

> 3. **Server developers**:

Reviewer 3: The benefits to what we're discussing below accrue to AS, less so to MCP servers.

> - **Trust in Metadata**: Servers have a way to trust the metadata they associate with a client (e.g. name and redirect URL)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **Trust in Metadata**: Authorization servers have a way to trust the metadata they associate with a client, such as name and redirect URL.
```

- **Single Client ID per App**: Servers can have a single client ID per client for users to revoke access or the server to revoke access
- **Selective Allow/Deny**: Servers can selectively allow or deny clients, without needing to coordinate with the client.
- **Database Management**: Servers do not need to handle an unbounded database or expiration flows

Currently, none of our existing approaches satisfies all these requirements. Pre-registration works great when clients and servers have an existing relationship, but requires too much effort for a dynamic setting. Dynamic Client Registration (DCR) reduces effort but creates operational headaches. Let's dig into why.

## Two Distinct Challenges in MCP Client Registration

After extensive discussion with implementers, we've identified that what initially seemed like competing solutions are actually addressing two orthogonal problems:

1. **Operational limitations** of Dynamic Client Registration in open environments
2. **Client identity and impersonation** risks across different deployment scenarios

> Let's tackle each separately.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Let's tackle each topic separately.
```

**For servers:**

- **Unbounded database growth**: Every registration creates a record with no natural expiry
- **Client expiry "black hole"**: There's no way to tell a client its ID is invalid without creating an open redirect vulnerability
- **Per-instance confusion**: Each user typically gets their own client ID even when using the same application (e.g., every Cursor user gets a different ID). Similarly, when a user views its authorized clients, it may see many registrations for the same client.
- **DoS vulnerability**: The `/register` endpoint is unauthenticated and writes to a database, requiring complex rate limiting

**For clients:**

- **Extra overhead**: Managing registration state and another secret beyond access/refresh tokens
- **No validity checking**: Can't verify if a client ID is still valid
- **Unclear lifecycle**: No guidance on when to re-register or update credentials

### **Solution: Client ID Metadata Documents (CIMD)**

Client ID Metadata Documents (described in [this draft RFC](https://www.ietf.org/archive/id/draft-looker-oauth-client-id-scheme-00.html) and implemented by Bluesky) elegantly sidestep these operational issues.

> Instead of a registration step, clients use an HTTPS metadata URL as their client ID directly. The server fetches the metadata from the URL at authorization time:

Reviewer 5: It is convenient to treat the client ID as a URL - the whole CIMD scheme works because of it :). 

How would we deal with cases where the client id is not a URL (e.g in enterprises where there may be existing identity infrastructure to assign identities to workloads via SPIFFE for example). Should we treat that as a separate "enterprise auth case", or is there a way to extend the metadata to allow for "alternate client ids" that can be used instead of the client URL (preference is for some way to use the same approach to simplify deployments).

Author: Pre-registered client ID's will always be supported, does that cover this case? so if the ID is not a URL, the AS falls back to looking it up

Reviewer 5: I'm thinking of the cases where we have seen enterprises deploy SPIFFE (and other similar type solutions). Reverting to manual registration is not scalable in those environments (it is often why SPIFFE gets deployed in the first place - to have a scalable workload identity management system that does not need human intervention).

In those cases, SPIFFE identifiers (they are URIs, not URLs) and credentials (JWTs, X.509 certs) are dynamically assigned (often per instance - something else we should try and figure out with CIMD). This is typically deployed at an infrastructure level, so all workloads in an environment have attested identities and credentials for strong authentication (so a step up from what we get with baseline CIMD in terms of strong auth).

In the case of DCR, the identifier format is not constrained, so the SPIFFE ID could be used as a software statement (there is a draft here: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-kasselman-oauth-dcr-trusted-issuer-token/). But with uneven DCR implementation and alternatives like CIMD, it would be valuable if we can find a way to use the CIMD mechanisms without constraining the client ID format (or separate the client id from the location of the client id metadata).

### **The Trust Spectrum**

We can map impersonation scenarios on two axes: attacker cost and mitigation complexity.

![alt text](image.png)

**Low attacker cost / Low mitigation complexity: Domain-based attacks**

- **Attack**: Register `attacker.com/callback`, claim to be "Claude Desktop"
- **Cost**: Trick user into clicking a link and consenting
- **Mitigation**:
  - Restrict trusted domains/URLs
  - Show warnings for unknown domains
  - Works with both DCR and CIMD

**Medium attacker cost / Medium mitigation complexity: Localhost impersonation**

- **Attack**: Run malicious app on `localhost:8080`, impersonate legitimate client
- **Cost**: Trick user into running a malicious application (plus consenting for that app to have data access)
- **Problem**: Desktop apps can't hold secrets, hard to prove identity

**High attacker cost / High mitigation complexity: OS-attested applications**

- **Attack**: Get malicious app signed by OS vendor
- **Cost**: Extremely high \- requires compromising OS vendor processes
- **Mitigation**: OS-level attestation (future work)

> ### **Solution: Software Statements for Desktop Applications**

Reviewer 6: There is also the potentially simpler option that the desktop application (if it has existing backend infrastructure like Claude Desktop) might choose to offload the authorization to its backend counterpart, in a web-browser. 

Of-course that would not work for purely client side applications, but universal-links, on native platforms (iOS, Windows, Android, macOS).

Author: Yea, it's a good point, I'll work that in.

For the middle tier, localhost impersonation, we need software statements. This involves:

1. Client hosts a JSON Web Key Set (JWKS) on their backend
2. Client authenticates the user through their own flow
3. Backend issues a short-lived, signed JWT attesting to the client's identity
4. Client includes this JWT in the OAuth flow
5. Server verifies the JWT against the trusted JWKS

This dramatically raises the bar for impersonation. An attacker would need to:

- Compromise the client's backend infrastructure, or
- Successfully impersonate the client's authentication flow

Crucially, **software statements work with both DCR and CIMD**. They're not a competing solution \- they're a complementary security layer.

### **Future: OS-Level Attestation**

The strongest protection would be OS-level attestation, e.g. having MacOS, Windows, or Android attest that a piece of software is legitimate. This would make impersonation unreasonably expensive. While the exact way this ties into a software statement is yet to be prototyped, the general shape is evident: thread OS-level identity verification through to the OAuth flow.

## **The Complementary Path Forward**

> We're not choosing between solutions. We're exploring complementary approaches for distinct problems:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
While we're looking at all available options, it's important to note that we're not choosing between solutions. We're exploring complementary approaches for distinct problems:
```

> **For operational issues**: Adding CIMD support in favor of DCR

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
**For operational issues**: We are looking at adding CIMD support in favor of DCR
```

- Keep DCR for backward compatibility
- Recommend CIMD for new implementations
- Both achieve the same authorization goal

**For trust issues**: Layering software statements on top

- Optional enhancement for both DCR and CIMD

> - Required only when localhost impersonation is a concern

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Required only when `localhost` impersonation is a concern
```

> - Servers choose their required trust level

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Authorization servers choose their required trust level
```

## **Security Considerations**

> Both CIMD and software statements require servers to make outbound HTTPS requests, potentially to untrusted domains. Implementations must:

Reviewer 4: Is this a concern in restricted environments where there may be network restrictions? It may be a topic that is raised earlier

> Both CIMD and software statements require servers to make outbound HTTPS requests, potentially to untrusted domains. Implementations must:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Both CIMD and software statements require authorization servers to make outbound HTTPS requests, potentially to untrusted domains. Implementations must:
```

- Prevent SSRF attacks by blocking internal network access
- Implement timeouts and size limits
- Consider caching strategies for performance
- Validate response formats strictly

> If we adopt these approaches, we’ll need good best practices and SDK support to help avoid vulnerabilities.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If we adopt these approaches, we’ll need good best practices and SDK support to help avoid vulnerabilities and provide a easy path for implementors.
```

> If we adopt these approaches, we’ll need good best practices and SDK support to help avoid vulnerabilities.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If we adopt these approaches, we'll need good best practices and SDK support to help avoid vulnerabilities and reduce the burden on developers.
```

## **Next Steps**

> Over the next few weeks, we'll be discussing both approaches in detail:

Reviewer 4: Always concerned with articles that are somewhat time bound. I use articles, such as these, as good comparisons between two technologies which may live beyond the short term discussion

Author: hmm good point, I can rephrase this line, and remove the "we intend" line below.

- [SEP-991: Client ID Metadata Documents](https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/specification/discussions/991)
- [SEP-1032: Software Statements with DCR](https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/specification/discussions/1032)

We intend to make a decision by the end of August.

> Get involved: Join the conversation in [Discord](https://discord.gg/modelcontextprotocol) (the \#auth-wg-client-registration channel) or comment on the SEPs directly.

Reviewer 3: @pcarleton invalid invite link?

Author: woops fixed

### **Solution: Software Statements for Desktop Applications**

For the middle tier, localhost impersonation, we need software statements. This involves:

1. Client hosts a JSON Web Key Set (JWKS) on their backend
2. Client authenticates the user through their own flow
3. Backend issues a short-lived, signed JWT attesting to the client's identity
4. Client includes this JWT in the OAuth flow
5. Server verifies the JWT against the trusted JWKS

This dramatically raises the bar for impersonation. An attacker would need to:

- Compromise the client's backend infrastructure, or
- Successfully impersonate the client's authentication flow

Crucially, **software statements work with both DCR and CIMD**. They're not a competing solution \- they're a complementary security layer.

### **Future: OS-Level Attestation**

The strongest protection would be OS-level attestation, e.g. having MacOS, Windows, or Android attest that a piece of software is legitimate. This would make impersonation unreasonably expensive. While the exact way this ties into a software statement is yet to be prototyped, the general shape is evident: thread OS-level identity verification through to the OAuth flow.

> 

Reviewer 5: OS-level attestation feels a bit narrow - from what we see in terms of different approaches to attestation, I would suggest we call this "platform-level attestation" or "compute platform-leve attestation", which leaves scope for OS, but also for other types of platform attestation.

Reviewer 5: A straight swap with an e.g. as examples will do the job. I would also steer clear of trying to defne how that is done - attestation is a broad topic and it is easier to condense the trust decision down to a trusted issuer, rather than exposing relying parties to the details of the attestation. The logic is that you trust the signer of the software statement to enforce policies that is compatible with your risk appetite.

Proposal below:

The strongest protection would be platform-level attestation, e.g. having MacOS, Windows, Android attest that a piece of software is legitimate. This would make impersonation unreasonably expensive. While the exact way this ties into a software statement is yet to be prototyped, the general shape is evident: thread platform-level identity verification through to the OAuth flow.

Reviewer 4: agree @ciamshrek . Especially with a public service, this is an area that would not be applicable/feasible
